# Profile your code in Python:

Like many other blogs, I would like to remind myself about wiseman's quote before sharing my experience about using profilers. 
```
Premature Optimisation is the root of all evil - [Donald Knuth]()
```
I have done a web-research about different profilers. But I have not found anything as handy as the Matlab-one, which gives user a crystal-clear idea, what lines need to be changed, whether it is a change of algorithim to optimise some function or maybe some stupid calls.


## When do you need to profile your code ?
If you have achieved to the point that your code is human-readable, modulersied. Code is running fine with sensible answer, but you are not happy with the efficienty of the code then it is high time to have a profiler. Profilers will help to find out bottlenecks of the program. According to `Pareto Principle` number of bottlenecks will be very few, and very hard to predict.  

### Profilers in Python 

### script profilers

There are many scripts profilers available in the web. The best of them is `cprofile` and `pstats` to extract the profile data out of it. There are other visual profiler like `dot` which creates a graph with different regular shapes, either sphere or by rectangles, area given by the most time taken by the particular line. 


### Function Profiler

#### Line Profilers
These profilers profile a code inside a function decorated by the `@profile` on top of the function. Visually it is like matlab but lacks in the html nature of looped profiling.  

#### Memory Profilers

In a python code, copy of data happens, without prior knowledge to the writer. There is a way to check this in python using Memory Profiler. This do hamper the speed when the script is memory bound.

### Cython Profilers 

##### With GIL
You can use handy profiler function profile.py, taken from the python website.

##### Without GIL
Once you have opened the GIL(Global Interpretor Lock), You are left with mostly, time.time() and annotated html generated by the cython during code generation. But none of these are conclusive but give the user rough idea, where it is taking most of the time.



[Django Blog]:http://reinout.vanrees.org/weblog/2012/04/18/profiling-python.html
[Cyrille's BLog]:http://cyrille.rossant.net/profiling-and-optimizing-python-code/
[CythonExample]:http://aroberge.blogspot.in/2010/01/profiling-adventures-and-cython.html
[CythonDoc]:http://docs.cython.org/src/tutorial/profiling_tutorial.html

[Stackoverlow]:http://stackoverflow.com/questions/582336/how-can-you-profile-a-python-script